why is social media use seem to
correlate directly with rises in anxiety
depression and self-harm
there seems to be from the most recent
research literature
sort of one distinctly positive thing
from social media and two distinctly
negative so the two distinctly negative
things is
one uh they call it social snacking but
essentially you replace actual high
quality
face-to-face interaction the type of
connections that you need to thrive as a
social being you replace it with a low
friction interaction online and it's not
a fair trade the second issue is social
comparison
so it's just not healthy for us to
constantly be looking at these carefully
curated positive portrayals of
everyone's life that's not we're not
wired for it and so that also makes us
less happy so it's it's it's the social
comparison which directly makes us less
happy and the social snacking
which keeps us away
from the type of actual interactions
that would make us more happy
[Music]
welcome to impact theory our goal with
this show and company is to introduce
you to the people and ideas that will
help you actually execute on your dreams
all right today's guest is a wall street
journal and new york times best-selling
author who earned his phd in electrical
engineering and computer science from
mit he's the author of six books his
work has been published in more than 20
languages and he's written 60
peer-reviewed papers that have been
cited more than 3 500 times he's a
provost distinguished professor of
computer science at georgetown
university but ironically he's most
famous for his views on digital
minimalism his ted talk on why you
should quit social media has been viewed
over 5 million times and his work on
this topic and related topics such as
doing deep work and avoiding a life of
distraction have been read by millions
of people around the world his insights
and expertise have made him one of the
most sought after minds on the subject
and he's been featured in most major
publications including the new york
times the wall street journal the new
yorker the washington post and the
economist to name but a few so please
help me in welcoming the man who true to
his core philosophy has never had a
social media account the best-selling
author of so good they can't ignore you
and digital minimalism cal newport
what's up how you doing
welcome to the show man of course i'm
super excited to have you because
i have been beyond obsessed with you
since you changed my entire view on
passion yes so i was the passion guy i
talked about passion all the time have
to have in your life yeah it's the
answer
and then a friend was like did you have
to read this book
it's all about how passion following
your passion is actually bad advice yes
so walk us through why is following your
passion bad advice yeah well i mean i
wrote that book
in 2012
because i was going through a career
transition so i was finishing up grad
school i was in sort of a post-doc year
going on to the job market
to be an academic which if you do write
means you're going to do your first and
last job interviews your whole life and
so i had this idea that if there was
ever a time i was going to get leverage
out of understanding how do people end
up really loving their careers this was
the point in my life where i'd get the
most leverage and so since i'd written a
couple books i figured instead of just
looking into this on my own i can write
a book about it as an excuse to
interview some people so i went out
there i looked at the research
literature talked to a lot of people who
seem to love what they do and try to get
to the bottom of it how do people get
there
and the first thing you discover if you
research this topic is especially at the
time
the most common advice is follow your
passion right that's what everyone was
saying you got to get after it you got
to crush it just get after your passion
and just figure that out and everything
else will work out but you spend a
little bit of time looking at the
research literature you know a little
bit of time talking to people who are
actually passionate and asking their
story and you see this advice
really isn't that good if anything
actually telling someone follow your
passion might reduce the probability
that they end up passionate about their
work that's interesting why yeah well
there's a couple issues so one that
advice presupposes that most people have
an intrinsic passion that they can
identify through introspection and then
use as the basis of their career choices
we don't have a lot of evidence that's
true
in fact most people probably don't have
a clearly identifiable passion this is
especially probably true of young people
people coming out let's say college
where this type of thinking becomes very
important so you tell someone who
doesn't have this clear passion i just
got to follow your passion
but you're setting them up right for
failure and it's already they're going
to be really worried and then second
we don't have a lot of evidence that
connecting a job to a pre-existing
interest plays a big role in whether or
not you get deep satisfaction out of
that job that's really surprising yeah
so so we have decades of research on
what leads people to actually feel sort
of motivation
towards their job what leads them to be
satisfied and it turns out that the
traits have very little to do with this
intrinsic match it has more to do with
things like impact
mastery connection with people doing
something worthwhile getting better at a
skill that's valued
if you get these generic traits you tend
to enjoy your job more and more in fact
research shows that if you can take a
group of people who all had the same job
and then they interviewed them to try to
understand how they felt about it
the main differentiating factor on what
separated someone from feeling like the
job was a calling versus just a job was
how long they'd been doing it
that is very surprising because the
longer they'd been doing it the better
they got at it the bigger sense of
impact they had the more connection they
had the people and so in my in my book
what i basically flipped the script and
said what i'm actually observing out
there
is that maybe eight times out of ten
if you interview someone who really
loves what they're doing
they probably started without a
clear-cut vision
that this is what i meant to do but what
they did commit to was getting very good
getting very good at skills becoming
very impactful building mastery and that
for this eight out of ten cases the
passion
follows the mastery
yeah that that to me is it was
one of those as soon as i was reading
what you were talking about i was like
oh my god this makes so much sense and
i'm so glad that i read it when i did
because as i stepped in front of the
camera and started talking to people
about how to build success in their life
the the like outpouring of crushing
anxiety that i got from people that that
like yo i don't have a passion i don't
know what i'm supposed to do like you're
so lucky you you you know you have this
passion and i thought it's interesting
though because it didn't start as a
passion it actually started as what i'll
call a minor area of interest
and then
tracing that back through the framework
of your book and realizing whoa like
this was a process
it made me want to package it up in a
way that i could get people and say
you're misconstruing my own story and
let me tell you what i actually did
to get here do you have like a package
that you give people that says all right
step one do this step two do this if you
really want to end up being passionate
well you can you can shrink it all the
way down to steve martin's advice which
is where i got the title for the book
which was be so good they can't ignore
you
it's like that's what martin used to
tell aspiring entertainers and what he
said was well they always were hoping
there was going to be some secret or
here's how you get noticed or here's how
you get the right agent what he would
always tell him is be so good they can't
ignore you if you do that lots of other
good things will come and so i ended up
naming that book so good they can't
ignore you is because that advice
basically turns out to be incredibly
applicable
especially if you're new let's say
you're new to the job market you're
right out of school you want to be
passionate about what you do
by far probably the most important thing
you can do the most important step you
can take if you want to maximize the
probability that you have a fantastic
working life is put your head down and
go into apprentice mode i'm going to
master something that's unambiguously
valuable
you do that
on that foundation all sorts of really
good things come good things that
include real satisfaction and passion
for your work but i want to go back and
and really wrap everything up around the
passion idea so are you saying that
somebody could take something that
intrinsically that zero interest or
maybe even negative interest and simply
by getting good that they will develop
passion for it and do you think there's
anything automatic in there about
mastery equals passion in a sort of
one-to-one way or is it
you do need to start with something that
you find intrinsically interesting it's
just not necessarily going to be
anything that feels like it could one
day be a passion yeah the latter is the
right way to think about it and
basically we have to lower the bar
so we have to lower the bar from this
impossible height where we put it which
is you have a one true passion and if
you figure it out you're gonna love your
work starting the next day and if you
get it wrong you're destined for a life
of misery like we have to lower that bar
down to
there are many different things upon
which you could build a life of real
fulfillment and passion but it's not
just dart throwing right i mean it has
to be something that you have an
interest in it has to be something that
you think would reward you
with more flexibility and options as you
got better at it right so so it's not
just arbitrary but most people could
probably pretty quickly identify
six or seven
directions that pass those qualifiers
and so a lot of what i'm saying is
that's enough
that's enough for the past to bar i like
this maybe it matches some of my skills
i like the options it would open up if i
did it well it seems to resonate in some
sort of ill-defined or ambiguous way
that's all enough
for something to be the foundation of a
passionate career and there's probably a
lot of things that that pass that
criterion that's okay
so now going to the idea of
apprenticeship um there was an article
written recently that i found really
interesting and it brought out in me a
rant so let's see how wonderfully um
inflammatory we can be here while being
very honest
this woman wrote an article saying whoa
i have this business i used to get
interns all the time like people would
constantly be asking me if they could be
an intern and she was like somewhere
around six or seven years ago it just
stopped and now people today are like um
unwilling to do or uninter i think she
may have even said they're uninterested
in doing not meaning like i'm out here
clamoring for people she was just like
surprised that people didn't want to be
an intern anymore and then the feedback
on the article they were skewering this
woman and saying oh can you believe that
people don't want to be enslaved oh can
you believe that people don't want to
work for free and i was like whoa
if i had one piece of advice for myself
going back in time in fact the cameraman
on this camera right here is leaving
this company because he's taking my
advice yes because the advice i gave him
was go who who is like living your
idealized life the the very life that
you couldn't imagine like oh my god if i
have that i love everything go offer to
work for them for free in exchange for
knowledge and connections like if i
can't give you that then you should
immediately leave because you're in this
beautiful part of your life where
poverty's okay you can still get laid
while being poor it's not so cute when
you're 40. yeah but like in your early
20s hey it's not like this big knock on
on who you are and your your value in
the world and so he literally was like
i'm gonna go do exactly that and so
that to me is brilliant so the fact that
they're like skewering this woman for
gaining to suggest that somebody
basically be an apprentice
i find scandalous for their sake
not mine yeah but for their sake yeah
well i don't think we we think enough
about
how hard it is to actually do
interesting and successful things
and so this this is a real issue that i
got into in that original book where
young people in particular
would write their own script
for this is how i want the world to work
this is how you know i want to run this
thing and i want to be really successful
and i want x y and z and here's what i
want to be important for this that that
i'm on social media a lot it's going to
be key and the fact that i'm just a
young go-getter and this will all work
out in about a year but the reality is
everything that is worthwhile is really
really hard and it's often really really
specific and so i'm always telling young
people something very similar before you
make your plan for how you're going to
execute you know becoming a book author
for example which a lot of people ask me
about
go talk to authors figure it out figure
out what the actual reality is of what
matters and how people succeed don't
write your own script
with the answers that you want it to be
because often there's a real conflict
because it's easy to come up with some
plan where you're like i'm going to do x
y and z i'm going to write
20 pages a day and something that's kind
of hard but not too hard and you think
it's going to be fun and it might have
nothing to do with how that industry
works but on the other hand if you can
get the intelligence maybe by by
interning with someone who can actually
teach you about the fields you really
care about and you understand uh this is
what's involved
then you know where to put your energy
you know where to get the leverage point
it's why in academia for for example uh
why the people who write papers for star
venues tend to train with other stars
because you just learn right if you're
at mit in the sciences you're going to
learn from people that this is what they
do they write papers for the top places
they know how to do it the mindset's all
built around it you can see what they
pay attention to and what they don't pay
what they don't pay attention to and
that type of apprenticeship actually
matters so
the the intoxication i felt at getting a
book called so good they can't ignore
you
which is
certainly your credo in life is
definitely mine
how do people do that how do they become
so good they can't be ignored well i
mean i say you should look to let's say
professional musicians professional
athletes professional chess players
people who have to get good
in a world that has a well-defined
competence hierarchy where you have a
chess ranking and you can't run away
from it you have a batting average right
you know like you can't you can't get
away from it watch how they train
because in their world there's a lot of
effort that has gone into how do you
systematically improve and what you see
is that they deliberately practice and
there's really no shortcut to deliberate
practice to gaining mastery in almost
any field but in knowledge work in
particular so in this sort of whole
array of sort of various creative and
other types of
professions
we don't think that way and people don't
actually do a lot of this sort of
systematic practice and so that's why
in so good they can't ignore you i go
and i hang out with professional guitar
player and i say okay i want to watch
you practice and in this case there's
actually a good reason to do so because
this is someone who started playing
guitar at the same time that i started
playing guitar and at the age where like
i was
not that great i played in a rock band
and we were like okay
he was being had a record deal was being
heralded as like this talent right in
new acoustic guitar playing so he said
great i want to understand why did he
become really really good and i didn't
watching him practice
in this sort of musician's frat house he
lived in in boston with all these other
musicians
answered the question 100
he was so intense when he was practicing
the guitar that he would forget to
breathe right so he'd be doing this he
was trying to get a lick faster so the
way he got the lick faster is let me
play it about ten percent faster than i
can comfortably play it and he was so
concentrated that he'd forget the
breathe and so he would do these ragged
gasps every once in a while when his
body would force them to take and take
in air
that's the whole difference i never did
that
that's stretching you're like what i
need to do is be better at this lick and
so i'm going to push myself beyond where
i'm comfortable i remember you saying
with that example that you were watching
him practice something that
wasn't necessarily fun for him he didn't
know how to do it so it was constantly
facing his inadequacy and you said what
i like to do was pick up my guitar and
jam and play a song that i'm good at and
put on some hindrance and like wail away
a little bit right
so now help people understand so you've
said that there's a big difference
between repetition and deliberate
practice so
how
and
even i like a lot of what i do is
probably a little too close to just
repetition
and it's the far too rare moment where i
really stop and think about weight what
piece of this can i break off
and do until i'm good at that piece and
then reinsert it back into the hole so
i'm not just
repeating it yeah
so how can people conceptualize the
difference between repetition and actual
deliberate practice right because
repetition after an initial point when
you're completely new to something
repetition does not make you better
and this is not it's not obvious right i
mean there's actually this interesting
performance psychology literature
starting the 70s was trying to really
understand
how do people become masters at things
and repetition was one of the
hypotheses maybe you do it a lot turns
out that's not the case
other people thought it was
understanding the world maybe building
up the right mental models that's not
the case it's deliberate practice and so
what's the difference deliberate
practice stretches you
you stretch yourself
past where you're comfortable
with the just like you do with a muscle
right you have to tire out the muscle
exhaust it if you're gonna if you're
gonna get growth right but it's very
uncomfortable stretching is
uncomfortable
and that's why people don't do it but
like when i was trying to upgrade my
writing so my first three books i wrote
as a student and they were student
advice books uh paperback
and i wanted to be an idea book
hardcover idea book writer
i kind of went down to the wilderness
for a while and said i have to get
better at writing and what i was
discovering was like just writing on my
blog for example wasn't stretching me
enough
and so i said i'm going to write for
magazines i found a magazine where you
know they paid for commissions and there
was an editor who was going to accept or
reject it so now i could deliberately
practice i had the stretch to try to get
my my assignments accepted and published
you know by this magazine right it
wasn't just repeating what i was doing
before now i was trying to stretch
myself and i did that for a year
and it made a big difference
and so that's deliberate practice i love
the way that your work really um
weaves into
itself and reinforces everything so
so good they can't ignore you obviously
really helps people understand how they
become passionate how they become
extraordinary that it's a process
and then deep work talking about well
now let's talk about how you make that
process efficient by getting rid of all
the clutter
how do people get good at deep work
itself
and
your early books were a lot about like
how to be effective at studying and you
were saying you thought it was just so
bizarre that people don't try to
optimize their ability to study yeah so
one how do we optimize our ability to do
that and then how do we begin to carve
out that space to really be successful
at going deep
yeah so so deep work which is just my
term for
concentrating very intensely right you
give something intense focus without
distraction so you don't glance at
things
no phone no browser tabs you're just
focused in
this skill is essentially the answer to
the question that my readers had about
so good they can't ignore you which was
okay how do i become so good that can't
be ignored and in a lot of fields this
ability to concentrate very intensely
first of all that's necessary for
deliberate practice deliberate practice
requires you to be in a state of deep
work
and deep work is also just what allows
you to produce very effectively if you
want to use your skills to produce high
quality work you want to produce it
at a high quantity for time spent very
concentrated effort
is what's important but but what i
discovered working on that book is that
it's a skill that has to be trained so
it's a little bit circular
if you're good at deep work you can pick
up skills very quickly but deep work
itself is a skill
that has to be trained
which a lot of people think of it more
like a habit like flossing their teeth
right i know how to do deep work i just
don't do enough of it but it really is
trained it really is much more like
playing the guitar that if you haven't
been practicing you shouldn't expect
that's going to sound very good and so
why is that like when i really think
about it like i hear you and i know
you've thought a lot more about this
than i have but it does feel like
flossing my teeth it does feel like i
just need to
not pick up my phone and look at it i
just need to focus
so is it kind of like meditation where
i'm learning to extend those periods of
time where i'm able to focus or
what is at work right well it's a very
unnatural activity actually so so giving
sustained concentration doing deep
thinking
it's not something that has a long
evolutionary history uh and so it's
actually really the invention of the
rented word in particular that helped
make the ability to think deeply more
widespread did you say the rented word
the written word writ that makes a lot
more sense yes well because reading
itself right is also a very unnatural
activity and it requires an incredible
amount of training to basically
get your brain able to do this activity
that we didn't evolve to do but what you
get out of doing reading is that your
mind becomes comfortable with this very
unnatural activity of keeping intense
focus on something right
so so in some sense it's not something
that we are evolved to do and so if we
don't practice it our mind wants to do
what it did in the
paleolithic savannah if what's going on
like i want a survey is there is there
like a mastodon over there is there like
my tribe member in trouble over there
except for now it's is there someone on
twitter is there someone but it's the
same that's that same instinct
and so it's something that has to be
practiced
we used to get this practice sort of in
our schooling
right because when you're going through
college for example before we had let's
say wireless internet or cell phones it
was just a lot of time in a library and
it was you in a book
and and there was no distractions around
you you would have to walk all the way
back to your dorm or something so like
we would get hours and hours of just
sort of practicing
reading deeply concentrating but we've
lost a lot of that now because you know
even in like the college environment
you're you're constantly doing this
you're constantly doing this
well you're looking at things and so we
actually are missing a lot of the
necessary training that i think you need
if you're going to be comfortable but i
argue it's really worth it
because so few people are actually
training their ability to concentrate
that if you're one of the few to do so
you have a huge competitive advantage
that's really interesting in the book
you talk about solitude deprivation
which i found really interesting so one
define solitude which i thought was
interesting that you took the time to do
that um
and then why it matters
yeah so
we think about solitude in different
ways um but the definition i liked came
from another book it was called lead
yourself first it was a book about
solitude and leadership but the
definition they used in this book
was that solitude is freedom from input
from other minds
so it has nothing to do with physical
isolation i mean in this room you could
certainly be in solitude if you're just
alone with your own thoughts but if
you're up on a mountaintop completely
isolated but have earbuds in right
you're not in solitude so it's nothing
with physical isolation it's what mode
your brain is in so if you're if your
brain is processing input that was
generated from another mind you're not
in solitude and if it's not it's just
observing or thinking its own thoughts
you are in a state of solitude and what
we know is that solitude is crucial
i mean you have to have this on a
regular basis in your life if you're
going to flourish and thrive as a human
being now this wasn't a problem until
about seven years ago
because it was unavoidable
that you were going to have solitude
just going about your day-to-day
business right you would just you'd be
in the car you didn't like was on the
radio solitude you're in line at the
drugstore
and you have to wait 10 minutes it's
solitude right you're just alone with
your own thoughts but for the first time
in human history
we've created the technology that makes
it possible to banish every last moment
of solitude from your life because now
you have ubiquitous high-speed wireless
internet and the supercomputer in your
pocket and there's big back-end
algorithms that will feed up to you as
sort of optimized selection of nuggets
at any moment
the problem with that is it gets all
solitude out of your life
creating a syndrome called solitude
deprivation syndrome which we're not
really wired for
and it makes us anxious it impedes our
development it impedes our creative and
professional insights it's not good
how do we build it back into our life
and what are the consequences some of
the things you talk about in the book in
terms of the consequences of of the way
that we're interacting with our digital
devices
it's um
if you're right about the cause it's
pretty terrifying and i don't think
anyone's gonna argue the sort of
realities about mental health issues
about attempted or hospitalizations due
to attempted suicide i mean it's pretty
crazy
yeah it really is i mean i think it's
getting stark that having this thing as
a constant companion
is not good for us
and what's important about this to
understand is that it's also not
fundamental so this behavior of
constantly looking at the phone is not
intrinsic to this technology in fact we
had both social media and smartphones
for years
before it became normal to look at your
phone all the time
the reason we do that and this is the
behavior that's causing all these issues
the reason we do that is that around the
point when the major social media
platforms were preparing for their ipos
they completely re-engineered the social
media experience so instead of it being
about posting and reading your friend's
post it became about this steady
incoming stream of social approval
indicators
like likes and retweets and photo tags
and comments and so now
you had a reason to keep going back to
the phone because every time you hit
this there might be another
reward there another indication of
social approval none of that was in the
original social media model but they
added it because it changed it from
something you checked every once in a
while that's something that you checked
all the time and it was really hard to
resist and that changed our entire
relationship with these devices and so
now we think about something we look at
all the time it sort of trained us to
think of it like this constant companion
that we always need to be looking at in
every downtime but that's very recent
and it's very contrived
and it's causing a lot of trouble
so how do we begin to carve out that
space for
solitude are there things that we can do
i know you've talked about walking like
what are some things that people can do
to train themselves because obviously
now most people are in a
very like you said pavlovian
response cycle where it's not going to
happen by accident for them to stop so
how do they break out of that and what
can they do to reintroduce solitude
well just for the issue with solitude
it's pretty easy to get it back all you
have to do is on a regular basis do
something without your phone
you basically go back about 10 years ago
not all the time but just occasionally
right so maybe one when you walk the dog
at some point like i'm not gonna bring
my phone or go to the drugstore i'm not
gonna bring my phone like just have some
activity you do most days without your
phone even if it's 20 minutes
there you're already getting
little doses of solitude you're breaking
the solitude complete solitude
deprivation syndrome
so now how do we
build in you talk a lot about detoxing
from technology
you have a method for sort of stripping
everything down and then reintroducing
it what does that process look like yeah
so this is the this is the bigger answer
right and and so the question is how do
we improve our relationship more
generally
with technology
in our personal life and so the
philosophy that i teach is digital
minimalism which just takes minimalism
which has been around forever
and it's an ancient idea and it applies
to all sorts of different parts of the
human experience an idea that says you
should focus on the things that are
really really valuable
to the exclusion of other things that
are much less valuable
so by putting your attention on the
things that you know for sure give you
big wins
and concentrate intensely on them you
can do better than taking that same
attention and trying to spread it over
many more things that also give you
smaller wins so if you apply this to
your digital life
what you get is a
approach to the apps and the services
and the the gadgets that says
i only want to use digital tools that
give me really big returns on a small
number of things i really care about
and i'm happy missing out on everything
else
which is a completely different way of
thinking about it than i think most
people have thought about their personal
digital life which is much more of a
maximalist mindset hey this thing might
bring me some value or some convenience
and i don't want to miss out on that so
i might as well try it out or i might as
well download that app or i might as
well sign up for it this sort of more
haphazard approach the digital
minimalist say no no no i know what i'm
all about i know what i want to do with
my time i know what's important to me
and i put tech to work incredibly
strategically
to help those things i really care about
and then everything else that's out
there i just ignore
so what is attention residue
how do we
make sure that we don't find ourselves
in that death loop yeah well i mean
attention residue is the
the killer for almost any creative
endeavor and it comes out of the
psychology literature uh this term
actually comes from a psychology
researcher named sophie leroy
basically what it says is if you're if
you're focused on something difficult
and then you shift your attention over
to something else and even if it's for
one minute right like you shift over to
look at an email or whatever
and then you come back
to the original hard thing there's a
residue
left from that contact switch and that
residue takes a while to clear out and
until it clears out your cognitive
performance
has declined so it's like you've taken
some reverse neurotropic and you're
dumber right and so the problem is is
the way that a lot of us work today when
we bring on more and more demands or
that we're really plugged into email or
social media or what have you is that
we're constantly doing these quick
checks
and we feel like hey we're single we're
doing the right thing i don't have this
window open at the same time as this
window i'm not multitasking anymore i've
got it all figured out but what we're
not realizing is the context switch of
each of these quick checks is creating
attention residue
and reducing our cognitive performance
and actually what a lot of knowledge
workers do is like every 10 minutes is
this quick glance right so now they're
in a state of persistent attention
residue and so they're performing
at a much reduced capacity and they
don't even realize this which is one of
the reasons why people who really
prioritize
long stretches
without any uh of the breaks one of the
reasons why they do so well is that
they're just avoiding the attention
residue they're avoiding the artificial
lowering of their capacity how can
people get into
flow
assuming that they like carve out
they're they're not doing quick checks
residue isn't the problem how can they
get themselves into a state of flow yeah
well i mean in general we're really bad
at figuring out how to get a good return
on human brains
and one of the reasons why we're so bad
is that we've adopted this workflow when
we had low friction communication
electronic communication tools come
along we adopted this workflow of let's
just have a constant unstructured
conversation
like let's just do what we would do when
it's the three of us in the savannah
hunting the mastodon we're just you know
talking as needed on the men hey go
there go there what do you see over
there we try to scale this into our
companies the problem is that requires
that the service this ongoing
unstructured conversation you have to be
constantly checking in on these
communication channels and everyone is
feeling the same fingers on the
blackboard that you're feeling because
it you can't do anything else with your
brain if you have to service these
conversations so so to go to your your
follow-up question so let's say you've
you've somehow been able to
find some space from this like how do
you actually then make the most of these
deep work sessions well something i
noticed is a lot of people who are good
at this have rituals
so they always have a ritual about how
they get started examples well like for
darwin for example like d darwin v
darwin charles darwin uh he built this
path
through his uh estate the downhouse
outside of london right and he called it
a sand walk because it was paved with
sand and and he had it go past the most
scenic parts of his property and the way
that he would get ready to do his work
on the origin of species every day is
that he did a certain number of laps of
this
and in fact so he would start doing the
laps and this would start easing his
brain into like okay let me get it in
the thinking mode let me clear out the
other let me clear out the residue let
me start loading up into my ram like
what it was i was thinking about and he
had a set number of laps he wanted to do
and so he would lay out that many rocks
on the path so that he wouldn't have to
waste mental resources keeping track of
the count
and every time he would pass by the
rocks he'd kick another one
off and so when he kicked the last rock
off he would then
detour into the study
and now i'm doing my whatever doing my
writing doing my reading or whatever
that's actually really common
a lot of deep workers have some sort of
ritual like that something they do do
you have one uh yeah i mean it depends
on what type of deep work i'm doing like
what location
i'm using but like in my in my house for
example i have a study where i do my
work and it's different than where i
keep my computer
um and so i had a library table made
because i've spent a lot of time in
university so i have an old-fashioned
library table with library lights and my
my books in the
mahogany bookcase next to it and so when
i work in there there's a whole ritual
clearing everything off and getting the
lights right
making it seem like it seemed back in
the day when you're in the the room in
the library as an undergraduate studying
or something like that to me that puts
me
in the mindset let's start doing deep
work and so those type of rituals are
important
you've got a concept you call productive
meditation yeah what is that
so it's one of these training
exercises if you want to be
better better at focusing and what you
do is you go for a walk
while you're walking you try to make
progress on a professional problem
just in your head so you're just
whatever it is figuring out a strategy
or or outlining a chapter or whatever it
is
just in your head while you walk and as
in mindfulness meditation when you
notice that your attention wanders off
of this and starts writing emails or
whatever it is you and your attention do
you notice that and you bring it back to
the problem you know i just have to
think and try to hold all the variables
in my head and make progress on the
problem just in my head
you do this it's very very difficult
you'll find it at first be very hard to
keep your concentration just in your
head on something that's hard because
you have to hold you have to hold the
variable steady and try to make progress
on if you're writing you have to
remember the whole outline but you get
better at it and so it's very intense
but you get better really quick it's
like doing pull-ups right like they're
really hard when when you first do
pull-ups but if you keep doing pull-ups
every day you start to
really get stronger
there seems to be from the most recent
research literature
sort of one distinctly positive thing
from social media and two distinctly
negative so the two distinctly negative
things is
one uh they call it social snacking but
essentially you replace actual high
quality
face-to-face interaction the type of
connections that you need to thrive as a
social being you replace it with a low
friction interaction online and it's not
a fair trade
and so if all you're doing is talking to
people on twitter and on facebook on
instagram and snapchat and you're not
actually sacrificing your time and
energy to
be there for
friends
close friends family community you feel
much much more lonely much more anxious
the second issue is social comparison
so it's just not healthy for us to
constantly be looking at these carefully
curated positive portrayals of
everyone's life that's not we're not
wired for it and so that also makes us
less happy so it's it's it's the social
comparison which directly makes us less
happy and the social snacking
which keeps us away
from the type of actual interactions
that would make us more happy those are
probably the two leading drivers for why
we see these correlations with increased
social media use
and less happiness less sociality
so they were um part of your argument on
this i thought was really made powerful
by the things that they were like well
maybe it's not that maybe it's this and
maybe it's this and they ended up seeing
that actually those don't line up walk
us through those because i think it
really adds punch to
your takeaway well i mean a lot of these
studies are correlational you're looking
at different generations you're looking
at different birth years you're trying
to understand
in general why is that population
different so when it came to teenagers
and mental health there was this sort of
off the charts moment
where the demographers that measure
different properties of different
generations when they got to this
generation z the first generation to
have ubiquitous access to smartphones
starting their adolescence
these mental health issues
increased more rapidly than anything
they'd ever seen before increase between
any generation so it's literally off the
charts like they don't see changes
usually the changes between generations
is much more gradual
and so they're trying to figure out why
what exactly are they measuring in this
case we're looking at think about it as
like birth year versus like per capita
incidences of anxiety and anxiety
related disorders right and so you get
to this birth year in the 90s that puts
you
at the smartphone era in your early
adolescence
and that goes up wow right and so
they're trying to figure out why but
like any good demographers you see there
could be a lot of different issues so
there could be a lot of different
conjectures and so they explored a lot
of different things
but the timing wasn't working out for
other things they thought well maybe it
has to do with you know the great
recession and economic anxiety but that
started earlier and this didn't start
till a little bit later and like well
maybe it's like political stuff and
everyone's stressed out but no that's
much later
that that comes much later they're
really trying to figure this out they
said well maybe it's self-reporting okay
so maybe yes it's true
that starting at this birth year people
report
anxiety anxiety-related disorders but
we've just become more used to that and
so maybe just people are more
comfortable but then they looked at the
hospitalization data and hospitalization
for self-harm went right up with it
right so it's not a reporting error and
so what you see is this sort of
narrowing of consensus
around the idea that there's really no
other explanation that fits the data as
well as giving social media adolescence
that's what's causing it
you've made some pretty bold statements
about how people are going to look back
on social media
what's the analogy that you use
well i think the cigarette analogy is
one that caught some attention
the actual analogy is if this research
literature does end up in a place that
says it's causing this much harm for
adolescents i said this was in a gq
interview um we'll probably look back
then at giving a 13 year old social
media the same way that we looked today
giving a 13 year old a pack of
cigarettes because we're learning that
the brain at that point
really can't handle the forces that are
unleashed by these sort of highly
optimized tools which are
built to exploit psychological
vulnerabilities in order to get a lot of
uses just like we artificially increase
the nicotine content in the tobacco and
cigarettes because we wanted people to
smoke more i mean these things have been
tuned up to a high degree like we talked
about before
it had to tune up this sort of
psychological exploitations if we were
to get people to look at it as much as
we needed people to look at it if the
revenue numbers were going to go up so
these things are
really tuned to play on sort of
psychological vulnerabilities involving
social approval and connection you give
that to a teenage brain which is
obsessed with that right it's very very
volatile
now what i love about all of your work
is that it really feeds into one super
powerful notion which is
what you said was the reason that i
write about this stuff the reason that i
think this matters is it stops people
from leading basically the good life
and you talk about how we've been trying
to define the good life for a very long
time or an interesting life i'd love for
you to define that like what why does
this matter what are we missing out on
what what is a good life what should
people be striving for
well i mean i'm a big advocate of what i
sometimes call the deep life but
basically doing a small number of
valuable things really well
we know that is uh
incredibly fulfilling so i think that's
fine fulfillment for me human
flourishing
i think aristotle got it right with this
concept of eudaimonia
which is not about happiness
and it's not about good things happening
or avoiding bad things eudemonia was
you're reaching a point of human
flourishing so you're sort of taking the
potential you have as a human and you're
making good on it
right so you feel like you're you're
making the most of what you're capable
of doing and i think he was right
writing all the way back then that this
is what for the ancient greeks you know
this is what you were looking for
uh is eudaimonia and so the deep life is
very much
uh
complementary to that
but it's not just about what you do
professionally it turns out sort of this
this depth right doing the the important
things well is very important in your
social life as well and so this is why
you know in digital minimalism i'm so
concerned
about people being very blithe about
how they're going to change what
sociality means like i'm going to do
things on my phone now i'm going to be
doing streaks on snapchat and selfies
and like let's just completely change
you know what it means to be social
that has big impacts because we know
we've known since the ancients that what
do you need to also feel like
flourishing thriving human being is you
have to take responsibility for and
sacrifice on behalf of family close
friends and community
you can't just do that like it has to be
i am connected and serving
the people in my immediate orbit we need
that as well the flourish so in your
work focusing
to do really good things and in your
social life focusing to actually be
there and serve and sacrifice for family
close friends and
community this is like an ancient
formula
for flourishing as a human being
a lot of recent tech has inadvertently
pushed us away from those things
yeah service and sacrifice that's
actually really pretty interesting um
[Music]
why do you think those two especially
the sacrifice like doing something
for others why is that so meaningful do
you think
well we're wired for it
i mean we're we're an intensely social
species which is why we're so successful
we can band together and you know make a
tv show right i mean we can we can work
together and actually solve problems how
are we able to do that well we're wired
to be very very good at social dynamics
and working together towards a common
goal in order for that to work you have
to be willing to actually make
sacrifices on behalf of other people and
this doesn't necessarily mean like
jumping on a hand grenade but like
calling someone
or or someone's having a hard time and
like i'm going to take an afternoon i'm
going to go over there and i'm going to
be there and i'm going to be with you
i'm going to be a source of comfort
right that's a that's a sacrifice of
time and energy which is much harder
than just you know
where you at on on you know facebook or
something like that right
but i think the reason why we're wired
to find great meaning and fulfillment in
that is because if we're doing that we
can build much stronger much more
cohesive social structure so it's sort
of in our homo sapien dna
that we want to have these very strong
responsibility sacrifice based
connections with people in our immediate
orbit
your next book which i am
just enthralled with the title so
probably about five or six years ago i
started saying that email will be the
downfall of western civilization yes and
i'm only sort of joking yes um
a world without email
how is that big enough for a book what's
the
the themes that you're going to be
tackling there and why do you think it's
important enough well i think we're
terrible at knowledge work
right especially knowledge work in the
age of digital technology
and digital networks and so if you look
back historically whenever you have
these intersections of technology and
commerce
it takes a while to figure it out so you
get the steam engine and rail
infrastructure the industrial revolution
starts it takes a long time for us to
really figure out how to effectively
build
industrial goods in a factory so we're
in the early stages of knowledge work in
the age of digital technology i think
we're just really bad at it and i think
it's it's literally holding back the
economic productivity
of the world at this point i mean
non-industrial productivity metrics have
been stagnant for over a decade
while all of this sort of technological
innovation was going on and i think it's
because the way that we are working
right now
is naive and simplistic and incredibly
ineffective and in particular what i
mean is
we have in general
adopted a workflow that i call the
hyperactive hive mind
which is let's just take the three
paleolithic hunter model and let's just
scale it up to our whole organization
we'll all have an inbox or a slack
channel and we'll just keep the
conversation going all day we'll figure
things out on the fly we'll just rock
and roll like hey i need this from you
tom did you get that and we'll just have
this ongoing conversation happen all day
just like we would do on the savannah
like we just keep talking in
unstructured manner we'll kind of figure
things out so it makes sense because
it's sort of our instincts and it's
incredibly convenient and it's
incredibly flexible but it's at direct
odds with what we know from psychology
and neuroscience about how you actually
use a human brain and create value and
our entire economy is increasingly based
on taking human brains having those
brains think about information and
produce new information that's valuable
this is entirely at odds with how we're
working because we should be going deep
and
constantly because in order to do the
hyperactive hive mind you have to
constantly service the conversation
and if you have to constantly search the
conversation you can't get anywhere near
your cognitive capacity and so we're
just leaving productivity on the shelf
so what do you think the world without
email actually looks like like e
i'm the ceo
if i right now said don't ever [__]
send another email
they'd be like yo yo i got email bro
like they would they would deal it like
drug dealers yeah i know they'd still do
it so what i think is going to happen
is that we're going to take the
hyperactive hive mind we're going to
have to replace it with something that's
much more well thought through and it
might be very industry specific
but like if i ran google
there's no way i'm going to spend 500k a
year on a 10x programmer and give them
an email address
say i can hire look
i'll hire a you know 22 year old whose
whole job is to sit there with 19
monitors open and communicate with the
hr department and the parking and
whatever and go to the meeting whatever
but i want this person with their team
you know coding and giving it their full
attention because i'm going to get so
much more value out of this person
then if instead i just say well you
should also be on email and slack and so
that everyone can bother you about
everything right now that ladder
scenario is very convenient for everyone
but but business is not about
convenience it's about value production
and so my my example from the industrial
world's the assembly line right
the assembly line is a giant pain in the
ass
if you're building cars like the easiest
thing to do their equivalent of the
hyperactive hive mind is like we have a
team of five guys here and they're
building a car right here and if we want
to scale this up we get five more guys
and they work on their car over there
and we get five more guys and they build
their car over there we just took what
was natural we scaled it up and then
henry ford at some point said wait a
second the assembly line
is going to produce cars much faster but
it was a huge pain in the ass i mean
it's really hard to get an assembly line
to work it's incredibly inconvenient if
you don't get it just right the whole
thing falls apart because you know this
thing is coming too fast and these
workers aren't ready for it you have to
spend more money you have to put in more
overheads you need more managers it was
like 10 to 100 x more
cars
and so that's the type of thinking i
think we need in knowledge work is
i'm willing to be radical i'm willing to
make things really inconvenient for
everyone but what i really want to focus
on is taking our core resource which is
these human brains and setting up an
environment where those brains can
produce value at their peak and do so in
a way that's really sustainable and
rewarding to the brains and doing this
all day
i just think it's an incredibly naive
and ineffective way so yeah a world
without email
the email protocol might still be around
we might actually use email for certain
purposes we might use slack for certain
purposes
but the workflow is going to change
and it's going to be focused on how do
we get the most value out of brains not
just
how can we take our paleolithic
hunter conversation just scale it up
i want to lock you in my basement until
you come up with the answer i am i'm so
desperate for this yeah like oh man
this is going to be big if you can
anyway like paint the picture of how
each industry moves forward
um
yeah
that that is definitely uh an itch that
i am particularly desperate for somebody
to scratch so i'm super excited to see
that woman and the way that your books
have all stacked on each other as as a
consumer and somebody who puts your work
to immediate and voracious use um
ferocious probably would have been a
better choice of words there but thanks
for letting us slide um
thank you
it's amazing
um tell these guys where they can find
you online
well not on social media yes
that is very clear yeah uh
calnewport.com nice and simple yeah all
right
what is the impact that you want to have
on the world
um
i think i want to help people live
deeper more meaningful lives
and i want to do so from the perspective
of figuring out
how to put all this technological
miracles that computer scientists like
me help invent how to put them the work
for you
and prevent them from just getting
in your way
from
reaching that state of eudemonia
i love that
all right guys you will you will be
changed by the gestalt of everything
that he's working on if you really want
to be extraordinary pick up his books
read them do as they say
it will make your life better if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care
kyle thank you so much
that was amazing if you found value in
cal's interview be sure to check out
ryan holiday and robert green click
either of the links below enjoy and i'll
see you there i want to influence them i
want to get inside your skin inside your
brain and alter how you look at the
world